---
title: We'll See - On the Occupy Wallstreet movement
layout: post
---

#### I was standing in the back of Occupy Austin's planning meeting.

In the middle of the room, a musician with black dreads had just offered a hundred-dollar bill to anyone present. He said he didn't want it. He said, "If anything has brought us together today, it's love." He said the money was there for whoever needed it.

We had spent a lot of time discussing what the mission was, whether we should issue demands, whether we were a 'we' at all. Some people felt we needed to organize, and that meant focusing on a common condition. Some felt we had to be more pro-active and start writing the schedule. Some people just wanted to have their moment. Everybody got a turn.

"In this crowd right now is somebody who needs help. They are in real trouble, and that's why they've come here." 

A movement had been coming. It had been on young people's minds for months, maybe even years, maybe as far back as the protests around the invasion of Iraq. I was still thinking about the day I heard about the bail-out and wrote on a white-board, "Socialism for the rich." My teacher took me to task for it, bellowing, "You don't know what you're talking about!" in a humiliatingly public ordeal. 

"For that person, I have this bill here -- a one-hundred dollar federal reserve *nothing.*"

70 billion to AIG. 80 billion to GM and Chrysler. 97 (BoA) + 29 (Bear Stearns) + 220 (Citi) = 360bn from the Fed. Not to overstate the matter, but, 50 years ago, that kind of money didn't exist. It seemed like public fraud on a massive scale.

"If they don't take it, I'm just going to tear it up."

And that's when a couple of girls jumped up from the floor and made a dash for the mic. They didn't call for a collection. They didn't suggest forming a treasury, or contributing the money to a charity. One of the girls got before the other, snatched the bill, and tore it up.

- - -

#### The Digital Generation

We have no political presence. We don't belong to institutions. We're not in unions; we're not in businesses; we're not in media that matters. Sometimes, news shows will read our tweets and surmise on the implications for businesses that chase our market. Our influence is, apparently, derived from our consumption.

Justice is supposed to preserve the social contract, but where was it after 2008? Where's the process we were taught to rely on? Where was the process for detainees? Where was the process for choosing to enter a war? We're asked to trust our leaders, but we just went through 8 years of leadership by war criminals under the support of a massive propaganda outlet that has captivated our parents, culminating in the near-destruction of the global economy.

And so we say, fuck the process. If they don't need it, we don't either. The Arab Spring launched with Twitter. It's digital democracy's revolution. Individuals can be co-opted, so we're empowering the crowd. Toppling your financial regime? Yeah, we've got an app for that -- and we won't explain how to use it.

- - -

#### That night at the cafe was Austin's first meeting.

Each speaker would have a little over a minute at a turn, and then simple majority would rule. There were mics, a pair of moderators, and a live stream running in the corner. I took a spot on the second floor so I could get a good view.

In the past five days, at least 10 different Reddit threads had reached the front-page about the mission, the arrests, Tony Bologna, and the dress code. One of those threads linked to a page where users were voting on demands. It was a lot of what you might expect: End the War on Drugs, Audit the Fed, Reverse Citizens United, and -- of course -- Bring Justice to Wall St. Some of those items had four-digit votes.

We were approaching the half-hour mark that night, and nothing had really been accomplished yet. There were strong arguments about the right course of action, but, from where we were standing, who could say? Nobody really had a solid idea of how we were being perceived, or who we were targeting, or whether that even mattered, so long as we made our presence known. The conversation began to flounder, so our moderator called a vote. Should we issue demands?

A little over a hundred people stood up in favor, according to the head count. It was five more than that, when you included the live-stream. The number of people who disagreed, however, depended on who you asked. There was a mis-count, and it was clear that the crowd wasn't excited by the prospect of doing it again.

Then, the room grew a bit restless. Some guys started shouting for us to table the issue, which the moderator impulsively suggested we put to a vote. That caused a real noise. Things could have gone down-hill fast if he hadn't applied a little crowd-control.

_Clap, clap, clap-clap-clap._

The noise level dropped as everyone repeated the sound-off. _Clap, clap, clap-clap-clap._ We were saved by our training from summer-camp.

"Nobody said the revolution would be easy," the moderator joked.

- - -

#### My dad wanted to know what the hell my generation was doing out there.

"The basic idea is to create a decentralized network of activist groups that work locally, then let the consensus boil upward."

He wasn't exactly buying it.

You don't have leaders? Then who's running it?

"They're more like organizers, but they're not readily-identifiable. The idea is that any one of us could step up at any time."

So you don't know who's leading you either? That sounds odd.

"It's meant to be fairly transparent."

It won't be. If there's ever power, it won't be.

"Okay... well it's really more about letting consensus rule. It's kind of an anarchist principle."

A consensus of what?

"Whoever gets involved."

That sounds like a nightmare.

"We'll write software."

_He paused for a moment._ Then who's in charge? The software?

"It'll be data-driven," I joked. He didn't follow. "We'll all contribute."

_My dad didn't support the war in Iraq when it happened. Not many Republicans can claim that._

Listen: I want you guys to organize. I'm not a part of your voter-block, and I don't share your beliefs, but I do believe you guys have the right to be heard, so I think it's important that you finally do organize. But whatever ideas you have about how things should work are not connected to reality. You need to put together an image, and deliver a message, and get involved in the process.

"That's the point, though: the process is fundamentally broken."

Maybe. Maybe, but I'll tell you now, what we're seeing is a bunch of kids with no real solutions, a weak understanding of the status quo, and an extremely scattered message. It's all, "we just love each other," or, "the banks screwed us over," and you sound like a bunch of wining idiots. You're supposed to be the intellectuals.

_He's reacting to the media coverage and treating it like canon. He complains when I do it to the Tea Party._

"We're just trying to get started, Dad. Look, I know this can seem unfocused, but we're trying something new. We think we need to lose a bit of the predictability to make this work."

I wouldn't put too much stake in that idea.

"You come from a different time."

_He sighed._ We'll see.

- - -

#### Adil's girl-friend was caught in Egypt when it all started.

She was in Alexandria, where things were thankfully tame, but we were still glued to al-Jazeera's web stream. For a week, nothing else mattered. We speculated on what it all meant, and debated the likely outcome, and reveled in the thought that Bush's failed war on Iraq could be out-shone by Facebook. I felt almost certain that the world had changed irrevocably. He wasn't so sure. "We'll see," was his only response. We'll see.

Things got pretty rocky for a while. Adil would come in at four in the afternoon (looking like he hadn't slept in days) and then tell me that a neighboring house was bombed, or that she had to try to cross the city. Oh, and her cell-phone just died. I was anxious to reassure him, so I told him about the citizen check-points with the arm-bands. "And look"-- I pointed at the screen-- "the military isn't firing on the civilians. That means they're on the same side." We'll see, he said.

Things fell into a regular pace. We'd had plenty of time to absorb the news, and now everyone was just waiting for the three words. Other countries began to follow suit. I thought it looked like the domino-effect in the 90s; it seemed reasonable. Adil's girl-friend was still without cell service, so it was only a few messages here and there. Of course, the Egyptian Internet was down.

"After the police fell apart, this thing was cinched," I told him. "The military isn't equipped for crowd-control, and it doesn't want to open fire on its own civilians, so the people have some serious sway. And look-- after Mubarak's gone, the military will know that the protests could come again at any time. This could be the most authentic revolution of all time."

We'll see.

The next Monday, Adil was as fresh-faced as if nothing had ever happened. "What's going on? Did she make it?"

He acted like he had forgotten about it. "Oh, yeah. I guess things got better after the first couple days. Apparently Cairo is pretty crazy, but a lot of the country barely knows what's going on. It's mostly in that one city."

I thought that was a pretty strange thought. Adil agreed.

A week later, we received an email from his girlfriend. Attached was a picture of her at the mall, posing with a tank.

- - -

#### And then? She tore it up.

The crowd erupted in cheers, and they didn't stop for a good minute. I'm told the other girl was given a hundred, and then she tore it up as well. I couldn't really see over the crowd, but, by then, I was busy paying my tab. After that, I don't really know what happened. I left.

"You didn't stay?" Jack asked with a somewhat-surprised look on his face. "Why not?"

I ashed a cigarette and leaned myself back. I was actually in a pretty good mood. In fact, I felt great. I shrugged.

"I don't think anybody knows what they're doing."

He kind of pshawed, like, what do you expect? We'd been reading about this for a while. Nobody was sure if this was for real, or just another circle jerk. "Have you looked at some of those threads?" He was mostly thinking of /r/politics. "It's not exactly enlightening stuff."

"Yeah..." I exhaled.

I hadn't felt this good in a while. Water-shed was the word that I kept thinking. Water-shed. "I guess people get caught up in it. I don't know."

Jack was waiting for a little more than that. "So what now?"

I had been talking about politics for months. The energy is all there for our generation to act. 18-35s are ready to organize, and we have the Web. I had been talking about this for _months_. So what now?

I yawned. "I'm focusing on my own things. These guys are probably going to do this with or without me. I'll support them, but I think I'd be better focused elsewhere."

That made sense to him. I'm sure he'd be glad not to hear about it anymore. It can be pretty tiring.

"Suit yourself-- You're the one that's into this. But, you know, you're going to feel pretty stupid if you let it pass you by." He took a mocking tone, trying to get a rise. "I mean, this is one could be different."

I chuckled, and shrugged, and wandered off to my thoughts. I considered getting some work done, or maybe watching an episode of something now that my night was open. Besides, I had just bought a gorgeous new LCD. Had I really waited this long to get two? The screen-space was a great change.

'This one could be different.' I wonder if I said that to him once, or if he just picked it. Sometimes I get carried away, so it's possible. Distributed leadership. Decentralized media. True populism. Is this time actually any different than before? It would be nice to think that. Might make me feel a little safer. Might make me feel a little more important, or part of something that is. But is that what I saw?

I watched the smoke that hung in the air. Jack shifted, apparently expecting me to reply. I shrugged. Amazing. I felt so calm. "We'll see," I told him.

We'll see.

~pfrazee